Document air_quality triggers & conditions (#44955)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_triggers/air_quality.pm25_crossed_threshold.markdown

---
title: "PM2.5 level crossed threshold"
trigger: air_quality.pm25_crossed_threshold
domain: air_quality
description: "Triggers after one or more PM2.5 levels cross a threshold."
related_triggers:
  - air_quality.pm25_changed
---

> The **PM2.5 level crossed threshold** trigger fires when the PM2.5 (particulate matter 2.5 micrometers or smaller) reading on one or more air quality sensors crosses a specific level. PM2.5 is one of the most widely tracked air quality metrics because these fine particles travel deep into the lungs and affect your health. When PM2.5 rises above 25 micrograms per cubic meter, air quality is already poor enough to bother sensitive groups, including children and anyone with asthma or allergies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **PM2.5 level crossed threshold** trigger fires when the PM2.5 (particulate matter 2.5 micrometers or smaller) reading on one or more air quality sensors crosses a specific level. PM2.5 is one of the most widely tracked air quality metrics because these fine particles travel deep into the lungs and affect your health. When PM2.5 rises above 25 μg/m³, air quality is already poor enough to bother sensitive groups, including children and anyone with asthma or allergies.
```

> Have your air purifier kick in the second PM2.5 crosses the safe limit, or close your windows automatically when wildfire smoke pushes outdoor readings into unhealthy territory. You also get a notification on your phone so you always know what is happening, whether you are at home or away. This trigger helps your home react to air quality changes faster than you ever could on your own.

Reviewer: Nitpick: change "kick in" to "start" to be less idiomatic:

```suggestion
Have your air purifier start the second PM2.5 crosses the safe limit, or close your windows automatically when wildfire smoke pushes outdoor readings into unhealthy territory. You also get a notification on your phone so you always know what is happening, whether you are at home or away. This trigger helps your home react to air quality changes faster than you ever could on your own.
```

{% include integrations/labs_entity_triggers_note.md %}

{% include triggers/ui_header.md %}

> To use this trigger in an automation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Using this trigger in an automation
```

{% example %}
trigger: |
  trigger: air_quality.pm25_crossed_threshold
  target:
    entity_id: sensor.outdoor_pm25
  options:
    threshold: 35
    behavior: any
{% endexample %}

This fires whenever the outdoor PM2.5 sensor crosses 35 in either direction.

### Options in YAML

YAML sometimes provides additional options for more complex use cases that are not available through the UI.

{% options_yaml %}
threshold:
  description: >
    The PM2.5 concentration the reading has to cross for the trigger to fire. Accepts a number or a reference to an `input_number`, `number`, or `sensor` entity.
  required: true
  type: any
behavior:
  description: >
    When multiple sensors are targeted, controls when the trigger fires. Accepts `any`, `first`, or `last`.
  required: true
  type: string
  default: any
for:
  description: >
    How long the reading must remain past the threshold before the trigger fires. Accepts a duration string in `HH:MM:SS` format.
  required: true
  type: string
  default: "00:00:00"
{% endoptions_yaml %}

{% include triggers/targets.md %}

{% include triggers/behavior.md %}

## Good to know

> - The trigger fires on any crossing, up or down. If you only want one direction, add a condition that checks whether the current PM2.5 level is above or below your threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The trigger fires on any crossing, up or down. If you want to monitor only one direction, add a condition that checks whether the current PM2.5 level is above or below your threshold.
```
